This is a representative sample of an approved waiver
application for 14 CFR ¤ 107.51(c)
Description of proposed operation:
Area of operation would include various locations where close proximity aerial data
collection is necessary in conditions outside of 107.51(c). This location is in class G
airspace, in sparsely populated area, and below 100Õ AGL (unless flown within a 100Õ
radius of a structure, including 100Õ above the structures immediate uppermost limit).
This location includes, but would not be limited to current buildings and constructions
projects.
We are requesting a waiver from Part 107.51(c), minimum visibility, in order to perform
routine aerial data collection in conditions outside of 107.51(c).
Prior to conducting operations, the Responsible Person will ensure that the remote pilot
and VO are trained in evaluating visibility using methods described in FAA Order JO
7900.5D, Ch.8. This training will be documented and made available upon request.
Further details, including reference material, lesson plans, and knowledge verification are
included in our Training Program Manual. The policies and procedures in our training
programs mitigate the risks of operating in conditions outside of 107.51(c) because they
focus on having the RPIC and VOÕs accumulate operating skills, knowledge, and
experience of unmanned aircraft in conditions outside of 107.51(c) prior to conducting
commercial operations.
The Responsible Person will also utilize the nearest FAA weather reporting station(s) to
aid in determining current weather conditions. Prior to operation, the Responsible Person
will conduct a site assessment of the proposed operating area in order to identify
obstructions within the operating area. A safety briefing (details located in operations
manual) with all participants will take place that outlines the proposed operation, local
obstructions, and methods for avoiding non-participating aircraft and people on the
ground. At no time will the sUA be operated in an area where the minimum flight
visibility is less than 1 statute mile as observed by the remote pilot or VOÕs location.
1. All operations in conditions outside of 107.51(c) would utilize a visual observer (VO).
The sUAs used in these operations will have equipage that will assist the RPIC identify
the geographic location, attitude, speed, and heading of the small unmanned aircraft. The
sUAs would be equipped with anti-collision lights that can be seen at a distance of 3
statute miles during daylight hours. Additionally the conspicuity of the sUA will be
increased with the addition of high visibility exterior features such as reflective material
and brightly colored coatings. Prior to operation, the Responsible Person will conduct a
site assessment of the proposed operating area in order to identify obstructions within the
operating area. A map will be prepared which denotes takeoff and landing points, the
area of operations, obstacles that may be difficult to see in conditions outside of
107.51(c) and the emergency descent zones to be used in the event that operations must
be immediately terminated. The sUA will be operated in close enough proximity for the
PIC and VO to maintain VLOS capability. Ground-based field tests in the operational
limitations proposed under this waiver request indicate that in the minimum visibility
visual line of sight could be consistently maintained at 400Õ from the aircraft. All
operations of the sUAS will be within 200Õ of the RPIC when operating in conditions
outside of 107.51(c). The sUA would never be operated beyond the actual visual
capabilities of the PIC and VO.
2. Not less than 24 hours prior to an operation in conditions outside of 107.51(c), a
NOTAM would be filed indicating the specific operating area, operating altitude, and
other notes. All operations in conditions outside of 107.51(c) would take place in class G
airspace. All operations will take place at a location that will have a defined perimeter
set up using cones and caution tape. Our operational safety measures include the use of
preprogrammed flight plans, signage concerning the use of UAS in locations where data
collection is taking place, and a comprehensive safety plan. The safety plan includes; an
identified control station, from which the RPIC will conduct operations, processes to
cease operations if unauthorized persons, vehicles, or aircraft enter the area of operation,
and visual and auditory signals to be used during operations to communicate that
unauthorized persons, vehicles, or aircraft have accessed the area. If other aircraft are
seen or heard in the vicinity, the RPIC will cease operations and land the sUA yielding
right of way to other aircraft. If people or vehicles are seen or heard in the operational
area, the RPIC will move the sUA a safe distance away from the people or vehicle until
the area is cleared or land if area cannot be cleared. Further details of our safety plan are
included in our Operations Manual.
3. Anti-collision lights that can be seen at a distance of 3 statute miles during daylight
will be installed on all aircraft operating in conditions outside of 107.51(c) to make the
sUA more conspicuous. Additionally, the proposed operations would be conducted in a
manner where the PICÕs control station is in close proximity to the sUA collecting data.
Staying in the same immediate area as the sUA in conditions outside of 107.51(c)
increases avoidance capabilities of all non-participating aircraft. Our situation is a
location where operating in conditions outside of 107.51(c) would be necessary.
Operations would only be flown in sparsely populated areas and in airspace inaccessible
to other aircraft.